source file: m1420.txt
Date: Mon, 18 May 1998 15:05:06 PDT

Subject: Re: Just Intonation-Specific MailingList

From: "Just Intonation" <justintonation@hotmail.com>

mr88cet@texas.net (Gary Morrison) wrote

>   I think that's great. Perhaps somebody out there might want to start 
one another for equal temperaments, or well temperaments. I recommend, 
however, that however many more specific lists there may be, people 
should not refrain from posting about JI here on the main >Mills college 
list as well.

   Hi, Gary, thanks for the response. Certainly that's true, and it's 
not my intention to reduce the JI message traffic in here. Soory this 
response is so late, but I've been working on the new web page for the 
just-intonation-specific mailing list (which now has 7 subscribers). 
It's at:

   http://www.geocities.com/SoHo/Cafe/4013/justmail.html

   One of the reasons I'm doing this is because I've developed a new 
mailing list format I call a "hyper-mailing-list", becuase it includes 
not only the mailing list, but a subscriber-centric web page, which 
helps give potential new subscribers a feel for the present subscribers 
to the list, and also an agressive publicity campaign on 8 related 
usenet newsgroups. If any of you have seen my publicity posts, they 
include links to the Just Intonation Network web site, and also the 
alternate tunings mailing list web page within that sight. So, I'm sure 
my efforts won't detract from this list at all, but help bring more 
subscribers in here, also.

>  Along different lines, I've long thought that a Newsgroup would be a 
good way to go for this sort of thing (so that you can keep the >threads 
straight)

   That's definitely a great idea! I'm just not familiar with the 
procedures for creating new newsgroups, and am more comfortable with the 
mailing list format.

   Bill Flavell



______________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com