source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 15 Oct 1995 21:06:48 -0700

Subject: Computer-aided composition

From: MMCK@delphi.com

>Perhaps Marion can expound a little further on his
>techniques for exploring a wide variety of tunings (perhaps
>comparing them to algorithmic composition techniques?), and why
>he finds that JI systems are easier to explore in that manner.  

There are two dimensions (at least) to this problem.  One is
theoretical, and one is practical.

In the theoretical dimension, we have at our disposal a musical
instrument of infinite resolution.  We are faced with the problem
of composing in a transcendental or irrational scale.  We need to
decide that certain combinations of notes are acceptable, or
consonant, and others are not consonant.  We know that factors
such as absolute pitch, volume, and harmonic content will affect
consonance, but for purposes of this simplified discussion, I
will ignore those.

There may be many valid ways of making this judgement, but
approximations of JI intervals are the usual.  You will hear
phrase like "this interval is a little flat from the major
third".   Judgements like this may be fine for humans, but are
far to general for a computer to understand.  It takes a much
more precise definition to program a computer to make judgements
about harmony.

It is fairly easy to guess that 14983/10000 fairly closely
approximates the 3/2, but other situations are not so clear cut--
especially if we intend to sound 3 or 4 notes at the same time. 
After all, the purpose of tempering is to introduce ambiguity
into the tuning so that intervals may be interpreted by the ear
in more than one way.

For example, we can take the ET approximation for the third, and
reduce it in steps to the JI third 5/4.

1259921/1000000
 527253/418481
 205415/163038
  88992/70633
  27431/21772
   6699/5317
    635/504
    286/227
     63/50
     29/23
      5/4

At each successive approximation, we are further from the
original note of the ET scale.  So we have a trade-off between
accuracy to the original model, and simplicity of tuning.  This
is a complex decision for only two notes, and if we make
different choices for different combinations of notes, which is
apparently what the ear does, then it is even more complex, and
what if we are to eschew this simple Euclidian series and opt to
only include 5, 7, or 11 limit numbers, or use some other
criteria altogether.

One can come up with thousands of JI scales that approximate any
irrational scale.  For example, there is no single JI scale that
is generally agreed upon to represent the harmonic
characteristics of 12ET, surely the single most analyzed scale in
human history.

The purpose of tempering is to introduce ambiguity, and the
degree to which it is successful in its purpose is also the
degree to which it becomes difficult to analyze.

OTH, JI scales contain none of that kind of ambiguity.  Each
combination of notes represents only one point on a gradient of
consonance, and can be interpreted only one way.  Some may find
harmonies acceptable that others do not, but it is possible a
computationally straightforward index of consonance without
having to search a vast tree of possibilities.

Therefore, the space that must be searched by a heuristic
designed to measure consonance is almost infinitely smaller for a
JI scale than an irrational scale.  LCM is the heuristic of
choice for me, but I think any of the others I have seen
discussed here would have the same characteristics.

In the practical dimension, one must also consider tuning
granularity.  Since all present day electronic instruments use
digital oscillators, they have nearly exact accuracy, and great
stability, but, because tuning has not been an important design
criteria, they have poor tuning granularity compared to what
could be done with very little more cost and engineering.

In addition, the tuning characteristics of wavetable synthesis
are a function of the sample length.  Tuning granularity may be
different for a piano or flute voice, or be a function of the
absolute pitch.  Manufacturer's of such instruments do not
release the sample length data, so, when you use one of these
devices, you are buying pseudo-random tuning, unless you want to
reverse engineer their firmware, or measure the output with a
frequency counter while changing voices etc.

FM synthesis at least produces predictable tuning with a
published spec.  But it is certainly not an implementation of
anything like infinite resolution.  Tuning numbers can only range
up to 1024.  I think tuning numbers of 10^10 are easily possible. 
But the Sound Blaster can still produce an astounding number of
scales.  For example, it can play some 72,000, 12-tone, five-
limit scales with more than 5 LCM60 chords.

For those who are into non-exact JI, or tempering, the tuning
characteristics of the chosen instrument introduce yet another
variable to further fuzzify computations required to evaluate a
particular combination of notes.
This is not to say that those computations can't, or shouldn't be
done, but it is a much, much harder problem than exact JI.  For
exact JI, tuning variations do not exist, so they do not need to
be considered in the harmonic analysis.

I have done experiments in pure algorithmic composition where you
just program some machine, and then let it produce music.  As a
matter of fact, in 1983, I built such a machine out of about 75
medium scale logic chips, and I still have it in my garage.  I
gradually came around to the view that computer-aided composition
is much better.

I usually use a minimum chord set, and in many cases my
compositions are made up entirely of LCM60 chords, which means
the harmony is much simpler than most.  If I want to use more
complex chords, I usually generate a more complex scale and still
use a minimum chord set.  This seems to me to give better results
than using a maximally consonant scale, but choosing more complex
chords.

If you are interested in learning more about my approach to this
problem, you can ftp FasTrak from the
ccm/tuning/software/pc/fastrak directory at mills.edu.  Even if
you don't have an IBM PC with a Sound Card, you might like to
read the on-line documentation.  You will need a PC to unzip the
file though.

Marion 

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 16 Oct 1995 13:00 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id DAA04717; Mon, 16 Oct 1995 03:59:38 -0700
Date: Mon, 16 Oct 1995 03:59:38 -0700
Message-Id: <00997F4FA2788C45.52D8@ezh.nl>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu