source file: m1383.txt
Date: Sun, 12 Apr 1998 09:59:16 -0700

Subject: Silver Apples

From: Aline Surman <stick@uswest.net>

Talk about your microtonal "pop" music; I just saw Silver Apples last 
nite, and what a hoot they are. They were actually on the scene about 
1967, and made two albums (both of which I still have on vinyl); they 
have now reformed, and have two new CD's out. Simeon is the leader, and 
he plays with a drummer. Simeon originally played this strange handmade 
rig of oscillators and such, which he built himself...last nite, he had 
the homemade stuff, augmented by keyboard synths to get samples and 
such. He plays killer oscillator solos over very intense grooves, but 
what's so great is that his solos are way outside the 12 tone system; it 
sounds like a very intuitive sense of melody and pitch, and it somehow 
works and sounds very natural. I kept thinking that Hendrix would 
approve, because it was very heavy in a rock sense, yet totally original 
and heartfelt, without any sense of trying to be commercial. Simeon is 
way into this, and they are a very interesting group. I think their 
website is www.silverapples.com...check them out if you like whacked out 
rock.
    As far as microtonal film soundtracks, "Forbidden Planet" is a top 
masterpiece, and again it's really unique and uncontrived. The Barrons 
(Bebe and Louis) built circuitry for each character in the movie, and 
were interested in sort of random effects; Louis said he wanted his 
circuits to do things at random; he liked being surprised. I've never 
heard anything quite like it. The Musician's Union made some noise 
because they were not sure if it was "music," so in the credits the music 
is called electronic tonalities. It is one of those ageless pieces; it 
doesn't sound any different now than it did then, it doesn't sound like 
part of it's "time"...Hstick