source file: m1524.txt
Date: Sun, 06 Sep 1998 14:04:41 -0700

Subject: Re: TUNING digest 1523

From: Kraig Grady <kraiggrady@anaphoria.com>

Thanks to Paul for the generalized lattice version of Centaur! I'm
figuring how you did it to use next time.David Finnamore asked about the
name centaur. At the time I first tuned this pump organ to a five limit
tuning that I found really not  very satisfying for what I wanted. So I
worked out Centaur with these 7cap intervals which kept your  5cap .just
major scale I thus saw it as a mixture of two different animals
respectfully. This was 1977. I recently found out that about this time
that the Chiron, a body between a planet and an asteroid was discovered
( iknew nothing of this!). It was by the name "Chiron" which came to me
(in a manner I wish not to disclose publicly) that I found this out.
That Chiron was the centaur teacher and guide of Jason and Hercules, I
find interesting since I came up with this tuning as a "guide" and
teaching method for these 7cap intervals. Just as interesting would be
the inversion of subharmonic version of this scale that I have never
tuned up since I rarely work in electronics. I used this scale for over
ten years along side Wilsons Cps tunings and never tired of it. Finally
I need to tune up another tuning that shared some of the reeds and stop
using it. Hopefully when I find another Estey Organ this will be the
first tuning I will do! BY THE WAY I AM ALWAYS LOOKING FOR ESTEY ORGANS.
the smaller 4 octave portables.AS for the whereabouts of Anaphoria, I
refer fellow travelers to the website below. Basically Anaphoria is
about 180 degrees from HERE!

--
Kraig Grady
North American Embassy of Anaphoria Island
http://www.anaphoria.com