source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 20 Sep 1996 01:27:30 -0700

Subject: Re: duh?

From: kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk (Jonathan Walker)

Scott_Purman@nile.com (Wed, 18 Sep 96, Subject: duh?) said:

> [C]an someone explain to me what the ratios are ratios of?
> or maybe tell me the ratios of the 12 tones in a
> traditional ET scale (or 13 tones, from C to C for 
> instance). I think I could pick it up from 
> there....thanks.
 
In answer to Scott Purnham, and on the assumption that 
others new to the list may have similar queries, I offer 
here a brief explanation of ratios, JI and 12TET. Apologies 
to the great majority of list subscribers for cluttering up 
their mailboxes -- you can skip to the next message.


What are they? -- The ratios of the frequencies of two 
pitches. 3/2 is a perfect fifth, 5/4 a just major third, 
81/64 a Pythagorean major third, 81/80 the syntonic comma 
(difference between 5/4 and 81/64). To decipher the ratios, 
you must extract the prime factors in the numerator and 
denominator: e.g.

		5/4 = 2^-2 * 5^1

		81/80 = 2^-2 * 3^4 * 5^-1

"*" is multiplication, "^" is an exponent superscript sign 
(so 3^4 is three-to-the-power-of-four, i.e. 81). I don't 
know just how rusty your maths might be, so I'll remind you 
that the negative exponent x^-1 means 1/x, so 2^-2 is 1/4, 
while 2^-2 * 5^1 is 5/4. The intervals in JI Ear Trainer are 
all smaller than an octave, so the numerator of the ratios 
will always be greater than the denominator, but less than 
twice the denominator; i.e. the ratios fall between 1/1 
(unison) and 2/1 (the octave).

Since you will be familiar with the harmonic series, this 
might be the most convenient point of entry. We are not 
concerned here with absolute frequency, expressed in Hz, but 
only with frequency relations. Define the fundamental as 1, 
so the second harmonic, an octave higher has twice the 
frequency, thus 2/1; the third harmonic, an octave and a 
fifth higher, has three times the frequency, thus 3/1; the 
fourth harmonic, two octaves higher is 4/1, i.e. (2^2)/1; 
the fifth harmonic, two octaves and a (just) major third 
higher is 5/1.

If a perfect fifth plus an octave is 3/1, how do you express 
a perfect fifth alone in ratio terms?  Just as multiplying 
the frequency by 2 raises a pitch by an octave, so division 
by 2 lowers a pitch by an octave; thus 3/2 is 3/1 less an 
octave -- a perfect fifth above the fundamental. How do you 
express a (just) major third in ratio terms? Since 5/1 is a 
major third plus two octaves, divide 5 by 4 -- that is, by 
2^2 -- to bring it down to a major third above the 
fundamental; 5/4 is therefore a major third. But I also 
mentioned a Pythagorean major third above; how is this 
derived? Multiplying a frequency by 3 is equivalent to 
raising a pitch by an octave and a fifth; now, say your 
fundamental is C, then 3 times the fundamental is a G, 3^2 
or 9 times is a D, 3^3 or 27 times is an A, and 3^4 or 81 
times is an E -- this is the 81st harmonic. In order to 
bring this E within the octave above the fundamental, we'll 
have to descend by six octaves, so we divide 81 by 2^6 or 
64, hence the ratio 81/64 for the Pythagorean major third.

How is the 81/64 third related to the 5/4 third? To find 
which is higher, express the two ratios in terms of a common 
denominator: thus we have 81/64 to compare with 80/64 -- 
this means that the Pythagorean third is higher. To express 
the difference in ratio terms, divide 81/64 by 5/4; this is 
equivalent to 81/64 * 4/5, which equals 81/80, i.e. the 
syntonic comma I mentioned above. You can now manipulate the 
ratios accordingly, without reference to the harmonic 
series. Such ratios were in any case discussed by music 
theorists long before the harmonic series and the frequency 
of sound-waves were understood: the Chinese took the 
relative lengths of bamboo pipes as their conceptual 
starting-point, Pythagoras the relative weights of hammers, 
and thereafter the divisions of a string became the most 
common means of conceptualising ratios (the monochord of 
mediaeval and Renaissance musicians was such a device -- it 
was never intended for performance).

So far I've left "Pythagorean" and "just" undefined, but we 
now have the means to rectify this. A Pythagorean interval 
is expressible in terms of a ratio that includes only 2 and 
3 (and their powers) in the numerator and denominator. A 
just interval will have a ratio that also includes 5 (and 
its powers) in the numerator and denominator. "Extended just 
intonation" includes prime numbers higher than 5. Partch's 
terminology is the most lucid for such purposes: Pythagorean 
intervals are 3-limit intervals, just intervals are 5-limit, 
while Partch used an 11-limit system. Note that each higher 
number limit includes the previous limit, so the 3-limit 
intervals form a proper subset of the 5-limit set; each 
sytem is, theoretically speaking, an infinite set of 
intervals (this doesn't conflict with the fact that one can 
be a subset of another). A quick test of the knowledge so 
far gained: express the major seventh in ratio terms, within 
the 5-limit system. Just as we can construct such an 
interval by adding a perfect fifth and a major third (in 
this case, just), so we multiply 3/2 and 5/4, to obtain 
15/8.

Finally, a word on the intervals of12-note equal temperament 
(12TET); these are irrational proportions, so we will have 
to abandon ratio terminology. The tuning system is 
constructed upon that proportion which, when multiplied by 
itself 12 times, equals 2. Thus we have to find an interval 
above 1/1, the starting pitch, twelve of which will make up 
an octave, i.e. 2/1. That interval is the twelfth root of 2 
above the 1/1 starting point, the starting frequency 
multiplied by 2^(1/12) -- that is, two to the power of a 
twelfth, or the twelfth root of two. Thus the equal tempered 
semitone is the proportion (2^[1/12])/1. How is the 12TET 
perfect fifth expressed in such terms? Since this fifth is 
seven 12TET semitones above an initial pitch, we want the 
seventh power of the twelfth root of 2, i.e. (2^[1/12])^7 = 
2^(7/12). How can this be compared to the 3/2 perfect fifth? 
Simply find the decimal value of each; you'll find the 3/2 
is very slightly higher. The 12TET system was adopted as a 
tuning convenience in the late 18th/early 19th centuries in 
Europe because it provided a good approximation of the 
common 3-limit intervals, and a tolerable -- or at least 
recognizable -- approximation of the 5-limit intervals. An 
equivalent method for constructing 12TET is to find the 
difference between 12 fifths and 7 octaves (the Pythagorean 
comma), and remove the twelfth root of this difference from 
each fifth; from this the "circle of fifths" is artificially 
derived. Each 12TET fifth will therefore be 3/2 divided by 
the twelfth root of the Pythagorean comma; I'll leave you to 
prove for yourself that this is equivalent to 2^(7/12).

-- 
Jonathan Walker
Queen's University Belfast
mailto:kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk
http://www.music.qub.ac.uk/~walker/

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 20 Sep 1996 12:20 +0200
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA07871; Fri, 20 Sep 1996 12:21:58 +0200
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA06325
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id DAA24800; Fri, 20 Sep 1996 03:21:55 -0700
Date: Fri, 20 Sep 1996 03:21:55 -0700
Message-Id: <009A8A7640C705C0.F61C@vbv40.ezh.nl>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu