source file: m1526.txt
Date: Thu, 10 Sep 1998 16:58:44 -0700

Subject: Partch Bio and Bill's remarks...

From: "Jonathan M. Szanto" <jszanto@adnc.com>

Dear Bill and all tunologists ~ ~ ~

Regarding the Gilmore Partch biography, Bill Alves had the following among
his comments:

>Unfortunately, the unavailability of his scores and the difficulty of
>rendering them in an easily-understood notation has made such analysis
>infrequent, at least from what I've seen or heard about. Why doesn't
>someone publish facsimilies of his scores, at least, with a guide to
>reading them, so that we can just peruse his scores in libraries like every
>other major composer of this century?

Well, Bill, if you had visited <shameless plug> Corporeal Meadows
</shameless plug> (address in my .sig below) anytime within the last few
weeks you would have seen the following:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
"Partch scores to be available: Schott Musik International will be
publishing scores of the works of Harry Partch at some point in the near
future. You may see the latest quarterly magazine containing the
announcement online at:

	http://www.schott-music.com/english/news.html

Look for the Journal, Issue Four, July/August (Note: this will require the
Acrobat Reader from Adobe Systems, found at:

	http://www.adobe.com/supportservice/custsupport/download.html

[Posted: 08/15/98]"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

So, there we go. Being my own devil's advocate, I wouldn't blame you
considering the Spring has been kind of quiet. Nonetheless -- I've
hesitated just blindly including the Tuning List in our email updates, but
if any of you individually want to get brief announcements of just such
news, along with any other additions to the Partch world, drop me a line at:

	putmeonthedamnlist@corporeal.com

..and you'll know when anything of importance happens that has any
relation to Partch. Really.

Furthermore, in a semi-humorous tone, I have to grin when I see Bill
mentioning having the scores "like every other major composer of this
century", if only because I don't think of Partch that way -- there haven't
*been* any other composers like him. If ever there was someone **not**
about notes, well...

But some people like to see scores, and I can understand that. Sometimes.

So I guess that's enough for now. Write if you want updates, as I'd like to
keep it on an individual basis rather than blanket-mailing to the various
lists. I've been kind of quiet here lately, maybe too many differential
equations floating around the bitstream, masquerading as concertos. I've
got some thoughts for sometime next week. Til then, I still love all people
who try to stay in tune.



As long as they're corporeal...



Cheers,
Jon
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Jonathan M. Szanto | Corporeal Meadows: Harry Partch, online. . .
 jszanto@adnc.com  |         http://www.corporeal.com/