source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 30 Sep 1996 12:19:30 -0700

Subject: The tonicity of tempered intervals and t

From: PAULE <ACADIAN/ACADIAN/PAULE%Acadian@mcimail.com>

..................................continued from last week.

According to Golstein[22], the precision with which freqency information is 
transmitted to the brain's central pitch processor is between 0.6% and 1.2% 
within a certain optimal frequency range. Musical tones normally have 
partials within this range, and since harmonic partials are integer 
multiples of thier fundamentals, they will yield the same 
ratio-interpretation for their fundamentals as would the fundamentals 
transposed into this range. (This is why we did not worry about overtones in 
the first place.) We can therefore model the tones with normal probability 
distributions in log-frequency space; the standard deviation (let's call it 
s) used can be between 0.6% and 1.2%, or greater to reflect various 
non-ideal conditions. The use of log-frequency space corresponds most 
closely with psychoacoustic research and musical practice.

Now the "width" in 17,

	    log(a(j))-log(b(j))

represents a section of log-freqeuncy space and thus a portion of the 
distribution lies within this range. The exact amount of probability 
contained withing this range is thus the certainty with which u=f(1)/f(2) is 
interpreted as p(j)/q(j), and is proportional to

	    1/(s*sqrt(2pi))*integral(exp(-.5((x-log(u))/s)^2),dx)

in log-frequency space. Now the width in (19) vanishes for large N, but it 
remains proportional to 1/L(j), so (replacing the integral by a product 
since W is small compared to s) we define the certainty with which u is 
intepreted as p(j)/q(j) as

	    C(u,p(j)/q(j))=1/(s*sqrt(2pi)L(j))*exp(-.5((log(p(j)/q(j))-log(u))/s)^2  
)	   (20)

(20) can be extended to chords of more than two notes as follows: A chord of 
n notes contains n(n-1)/2 different intervals. But since the whole chord 
must be related to a single fundamental, any individual interval might not 
be in lowest terms, and the "limit" should now be the greatest of all the 
odd factors of the numbers used to represent the chord. Denote this limit by 
L(t); we therefore define

	    NC(L(j,t))=NC(L(j))L(j)/L(t)

We then have

	    C(chord)=product over all intervals(C(L(j,t))^(2/n))

where the exponent 2/n is the number of independent degrees of freedom in 
tuning the chord, n-1, divided by the number of factors in the product, 
n(n-1)/2. This is done becuse multiplying probabilities of n-1 independent 
judgments is the probablity of the overall judgment; the exponent is thus a 
correction for the fact that the number of intervals increases faster than 
the number of notes. In other words, take the geometric mean certainty, and 
multiply it by itself a number of times appropriate to the true number of 
degrees of freesom. This effectively reduces the standard deviation s by a 
fatcor 1/(sqrt(n-1)), as one would guess from general statistical 
considerations.

As for finding the roots of chords, Parncutt states,[23]

	    The pitch pattern of a complex tone may be recognized even if parts of 
the pattern are
	    missing, or extra elements are added. Similarly . . .the root of a 
chord may be
	    perceived if notes corresponding to harmonics of the root are missing, 
or if notes not
	    corresponding to harmonics are added. For example, the root of the C 
major triad is
	    weakened, but not changed, if the note E (which corresponds to the 
fifth harmonic of
	    C) is replaced by Eb (which doesn't correspond to any normally audible 
harmonic of C);
	    the root (C) is maintained by the strong root implication of the fifth 
C-G.

So a good guess would be that for a four-note chord, whichever of its two, 
three, or four-note subgroups has an interpretation of the gretest C-value 
is the subgroup that determines the root; the root itself is the note 
interpreted as a power of 2, since it is then octave-equivalent to the 
fundamental. If none of the notes of the chord are interpreted as a power of 
two, the chord seems unstable, as the sensation of the fundamental is quite 
secure.


[13] Adapted from van Eck, C. L. van Panthaleon. 1981. _J. S. Bach's 
Critique of Pure Music_. Princo, Culemborg, The Netherlands, Appendix II.

[14] Parncutt, Richard. 1989. _Harmony: A Psychoacoustical Approach_. 
Springer-Varlag, New York, p. 70.

[15] Goldstein, J. L., 1973. "An optimum processor theory for the central 
formation of the pitch of complex tones," _J. Acoust. Soc. Amer._ Vol. 54 p. 
1496.

[16] Terhardt, E. 1974. "Pitch, consonance, and harmony." _J. Acoust. Soc. 
Amer._ Vol 55 p. 1061.

[17] Wightmann, F. L. 1973. "The pattern-transformation model of pitch." J. 
Acoust. Soc. Amer. Vol. 54 p. 407.

[18] If we were to fix f(q) and vary f(p), we would only have an upper bound 
on q, giving us an infinite series of fractions to consider. Fixing the 
center of the interval leads to Mann's criterion, p+q<=N. Mann, Chester D. 
1990. _Analytic Study of Harmonic Intervals_. Tustin, Calif. Either way, we 
still end up with (7) below, so that the relative certainties of various 
interpretations of a given interval will remain the same. (5) is chosen 
because the series produced by it display a greater degree of octave 
equivalence.

[19] Three proofs of this are given in Hardy, G. H. and Wright, E.M. 1960. 
_An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers_. Oxford University Press, London, 
Ch. 3.

[20] See Mann, p. 163 for one possible justification.

[21] Partch, p. 184

[22] Goldstein, p. 1499

[23] Parncutt, p. 70.


Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 1 Oct 1996 02:00 +0200
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA06949; Tue, 1 Oct 1996 01:00:22 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA06580
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id RAA29662; Mon, 30 Sep 1996 17:00:19 -0700
Date: Mon, 30 Sep 1996 17:00:19 -0700
Message-Id: <960930235656_71670.2576_HHB57-4@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu