source file: m1495.txt
Date: Wed, 5 Aug 1998 13:39:53 -0700 (PDT)

Subject: Numbers, Mark Rankin

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

I think one can find correspondences between most small numbered music
scales and "sacred," or at least interesting, integers. For example, 19 is
proof of the sacredness of the Koran according to Dr. Rashad Khalifa, and 9
is sacred to Bahais (their world headquarters building in Evanston, IL is
in the shape of an enneagon).

Eight is important in Buddhism (and physics, The Eight-Fold Way). Thirteen
is
both unlucky and I think the number of persons in a minyan(?); also a
"Baker's Dozen."  Supposedly, it was the number at the Last Supper
(including Christ and Judas).

 Larry Polansky finds much significance in 17, though the the Pythagoreans
disdained it as it falls between 16 (perfect square) and 18 (twice a
square). One can also construct a heptakaidekagon with only a compass and
an unmarked ruler. Other constructable N-gons have 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12,
15, 16, 20, 24, 30, 32, 34,...257, 65537... sides.

Capek mentions "triton" (3-toned) music in "War with the Newts" (pun on
triton, a European crested newt). Four was sacred to the Pythagoreans, as
was 10. Six is a perfect number, as is 28 (4x7, 2 x14)

I must admit to drawing a blank this PM WRT 11. Anyone?

According to one account, King Arthur's Round Table had 31 seats as did the
number of administrative posts in the office of a Roman provincial
governor.

I am reminded of one of Dr. Matrix's (aka Martin Gardner) proofs that there
are no UNinteresting integers (and by extension, no uninteresting ET's).
Let us assume there is a smallest interesting integer. Then 1 less than
this integer is interesting by virtue of its position. Every number less by
1 than this number is similarly interesting.  

In like manner, one can prove that 1 more than the smallest interesting
number is either interesting per se or interesting by position. Hence all
integers are interesting and all tunings are worth considering.


I saw Mark Rankin in San Diego a few weeks ago on his way to the Rainbow
Gathering. His mailing address is P.O. Box 201, Alderpoint, CA 95511. One
still needs a luthier to attach the fretboard holder to the instrument
unless one is skilled at cabinetry. There is also a German (?) inventor of
a guitar with sliding frets under each string. I don't know the name and
address, alas, but
John Schneider has one.

--John