source file: m1401.txt
Date: Thu, 30 Apr 1998 20:50:45 -0700 (PDT)

Subject: 1/1 via the 'Net?

From: jinetwk@dnai.com (Just Intonation Network)

I'd like to conduct an experiment to determine the feasability of
distributing 1/1 via the 'net, in the form of Adobe PDF (portable document
format) files. To view or print these files, you will need Adobe Acrobat
Reader (version 2.1 or later). Acrobat Reader is available free from
www.adobe.com and is available for most computer platforms.

JIN members who want to participate in this experiment should email me their
addresses at jinetwk@dnai.com (DO NOT RESPOND TO THE TUNING LIST). The files
may be sent as attachments to email or by placing them on a
password-protected directory on the JIN web site. If you have a preference
as to how to receive the files, be sure to include that information in your
message.

Note: there is no plan at this time to discontinue the print version of 1/1,
but net distribution would allow U.S. readers to receive the journal as much
as two months before it arrives via third class bulk mail. (1/1 would still
be mailed to all U.S. subscribers because a minimum mailing of 200 is
required to meet the bulk mailing requirements.) If net distribution is
successful, it might be possible to have a lower-priced net-only
subscription for subscribers outside the U.S. (international subscriptions
rates are high because of the cost of airmail).
==========================================================================
David B. Doty                                            jinetwk@dnai.com
Just Intonation Network                      http://www.dnai.com/~jinetwk
Editorial:(650) 694-4727                             535 Stevenson Street
JI Store: (415) 864-8123                          San Francisco, CA 94103
FAX:  (415) 864-8726