source file: m1421.txt
Date: Mon, 18 May 1998 19:54:00 -0700

Subject: Ivor/Blackwood

From: Aline Surman <stick@uswest.net>

Of course, it's really hard to say one person's music is "better" 
than another's when you are dealing with really profound folks, as both 
Ivor and Easley Blackwood certainly are (were). Ivor was not much of a 
technician, in the sense that his music wasn't that hard to physically 
play; yet, he was a deep and feeling man, and his best works are 
beautiful and meaningful; they really touch me. Blackwood is a world 
class pianist and composer, capable of playing extremely difficult works 
such as Ives' Concord Sonata; his compositions on "Microtonal" are surely 
well crafted and technically complex. Yet, I find myself listening to 
Ivor's "Detweleveulate" more often; I have no reason other than I like 
the feeling more. And, on the subject of Blackwood's 15 tone guitar 
etude; the sharp 5ths really bug me, especially because the piece itself 
is reflective of music ("Baroque") where the 5ths were much closer to 
pure. In fact, I've always wondered why Blackwood chose such a form for 
the 15 octave tuning; nothing wrong with 15, but it seems to be fighting 
the very style it's composed in. I talked with Blackwood on the phone 
once, and he said that he thought 15 would be good for rock music, and I 
agree. Rock thrives on dissonance (some styles do, anyway), and I can 
really see his point. At any rate, all this is so personal and subjective 
that it's hard to see a right or wrong, just feelings and 
choices...Hstick