source file: m1506.txt
Date: Sun, 16 Aug 1998 15:57:33 -0500

Subject: Re: TUNING digest 1505

From: Gary Morrison <mr88cet@texas.net>

> Here at SJSU we have been committed to Macs from the start even though we
> do have Windows and SGIs- But 95% of things are Macs- we just got the new
> G3s and they scream!

   I recently paid off all of my credit cards, and promptly (as I promised
myself - hey, it's the American way, right?) went off into debt again by
upgrading my dreadfully outdated PowerBook 145B (25MHz 68030, 8Meg RAM,
80Meg disk, 640x480 black and white (literally - not even grayscale) screen)
to a G3 PowerBook (230MHz G3, 96Meg RAM, 2Gig disk, 1024x768
16-million-color screen).  Not surprisingly, to say that it's faster would
be an understatement to say the least!

   It's pretty darned quick alright, and that even with no "backside cache",
the G3's claim to fame.  And on top of that, the G3 PowerBooks aren't all
that much more expensive than comparable PC laptops - a little more
expensive, but not much.  Now that's mostly because there's no "generic" PC
laptop business to speak of (or none that I know of).  Laptops are dominated
by name brands, and thus name-brand prices.  Desktop machines Pentium II
machines, on the other hand, are probably going to be cheaper than desktop
G3 machines, since you can get non-name-brand desktop PCs.

   I hear that there have been some early problems with the various audio
sequencer plugin formats, and hardware as well, not quite working on the G3
machines.  I don't personally know much about that, since I haven't upgraded
my desktop machine yet, but I hear that it won't be long before the problems
are solved, if they aren't already.