source file: mills2.txt
Date:         Wed, 27 Sep 1995 09:45:31 -0400

Subject:      Re: temperaments

From:         John Sankey <bf250@FREENET.CARLETON.CA>

I referred explicitly to Werckmeister III and
d'Alembert/Rousseau, not to non-ET in general, in my comment
about the divide between theoretical and practical writers on
temperament. I reject Kirnberger too - I have yet to find a
significant body of baroque music for which any of his tunings
work better than the ones I mention. In fact, his tunings
usually get phrasing stress backwards to my ears. And,
1/4-comma mean tone was almost certainly softened by most
harpsichordists (virginalists? but NOT organists) from the
earliest times. And, I thought we were talking about J.S.Bach,
not three generations later (e.g. Czerny) - I have no
experience at all that late.

My impression (my notes do not record statistics such as this, I
was just a kid in a candy shop then!) came from the music
section of the library at Cambridge England when I studied
there for 2 years in the 60's. It is all too true that the
vast majority of writing on temperament is by dilatants and
theoreticians, not by accomplished musicians.

I believe Scarlatti tuned his harpsichords in the standard
French temperament of the time, and will post a summary of the
paper Bill Sethares & I have written on this once it has been
accepted for publication. Bill is the mathematician (and a
good one) - I use my ears.

If you can't hear the difference between ET and WIII for Bach,
relax and use ET. There are thousands of ways to enjoy music -
you don't have to play the way I do!

--
John Sankey              bf250@freenet.carleton.ca
Music is Beauty, Beauty is Truth, Truth is Freedom