source file: m1415.txt
Date: Thu, 14 May 1998 08:40:14 -0400

Subject: threeness and more

From: Daniel Wolf <DJWOLF_MATERIAL@compuserve.com>

Carl Lumma wrote,

>But if I'm breathing, I'm =

>not at a loss to hear the "3-ness" in the 81/64 or the "5-ness" in the
5/4.

Paul Erlich responded:

>I don't know what you're breathing. Consider the following intervals:

(etc.)

Erlich is right that you are not going to pick the 'threeness' out of .1
cents stops between a moving and a fixed sine wave. 'Threeness' is going =
to
have to be heard contextually, that is, an 81/64 will be heard as a 3/2
above a pitch understood, again contextually, to be 27/16 above a known
tonic.

I happen to find it easier to hear the 'nineness' in an 81/64. Against a
drone, I sing up a 9/8 major second and then singing either a 10/9 or 9/8=

above this tone is quite easy.

Following the long duration work of La Monte Young and my own installatio=
ns
with massive clusters of pitches related in frequency as pries, I am
increasingly convinced that perception of higher-prime relationships is
possible but that (a) the conditions of presentation must differ
qualitatively and quantitatively from conventional concert music
situations, and (b) the physiologically means of perception is either a
radical extension of the standard listening mechanism or an altogether
alternative mechanism, perhaps spatial.

One example. An installation that I made for the Kunsthalle Zug, in
Switzerland, used ratios involving prime numbers below 1024 in clusters o=
f
up to 20 tones. As insurance against a failure by my Rayna synthesizer, I=

made several DAT recordings at different sampling rates, all of which had=

increased beating when compared with the original. To get around this, I
retuned the original to the 'key' of the DAT sampling rate, and the
excessive beating disappeared. Although the sampling rate of the DAT was =
-
according to all standard theory - adequate to perception, all of the sta=
ff
members of the Kunsthalle could immediately discriminate between the
original Rayna version and the DAT sampling. Clearly, although we were no=
t
dealing with a traditional music-functional distinction - as found betwee=
n
ratios of 3 and 5 - the distinctions between these higher prime identitie=
s
were articulated in the installation.  =





 =