source file: m1418.txt
Date: Sat, 16 May 1998 21:11:40 PDT

Subject: Just Intonation-Specific MailingList

From: "Just Intonation" <justintonation@hotmail.com>

Hi, everybody. After reading the excellent historical and 
geographical overview of microtonality in the US by Brian McLaren:

   http://w3.teaser.fr/~daschour/usa.html

   ..., I've decided to disband the little triple-just mailing list I 
started and to start another specifically for just intonation in general 
(as opposed to various equal-tempered non-12-tone scales, and non-just, 
non-equal-tempered scales), since that's the area that I'm most 
specifically interested in.

   This will provide a smaller and more specific alternative to the 
Mills College alternate tunings mailing list. I think the whole field 
really suffers from a lack of publicity and public relations, and being 
a publicity wonk myself, I definitely want to do something about that. 
So I'll be publicizing this new mailing list on 8 usenet newsgroups, and 
my publicity notices will also include links to the Mills College 
alternate tunings mailing list page at the Just Intonation web site (for 
those who aren't aware of it's existance), the introduction to just 
intonation at the same web site, as well as Brian McLaren's article. 

   Hopefully, this will kill 3 birds with one stone, and be in the best 
interests of everybody. 

   I also want to create a just intonation-specific web page with more 
precise links to specific articles than there are at the Just Intonation 
web page. As long as I'm going to be doing all this research for my own 
use, I might as well create an archive of links to the best writings on 
just intonation on the web while I'm at it. Please let me know by 
private e-mail which articles on the web you think are the best 
regarding just intonation. Thanks.

   Bill Flavell
   

______________________________________________________
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com