source file: m1570.txt
Date: Sat, 31 Oct 1998 15:41:20 -0800

Subject: Re:consonance/disonance

From: Kraig Grady <kraiggrady@anaphoria.com>

Back in the early 80's I composed quite a few compositions involving the
inversions of just intonation tetrads. I experimented with quite a few
"formulas" 1. adding all the tones how they occurred in the harmonic
series plus all Ist order difference tones. 2. the same as the previous
but omitting the duplications. So if a certain number occurred more than
once it was omitted. this out of the two was more successful. a quantum
physician at CERN supplied me at one time with a "plug in" the numbers
version of Schrodingers Wave equation which did not provided me with a
consonance to dissonance sequence but a sequence of a certain quality
that was "logical " on some level I can't describe. By the way does
anyone have versions of Barlows and tenney formulas that we of lesser
math comprehension could use to see if it is even worth while. The
notion of lower harmonics /less dissonance relationship should in my
empirical experience be replaced with the notions that the higher the
"coincidences" between the material the more consonant. This would
include those irrational number relationships where pitches are related
by difference and combination tones. Also would explain the success of
Navarro's choral ideas.It would be interesting if we could experiments
as a group with different formulas and compare our thoughts and results!

--
Kraig Grady
North American Embassy of Anaphoria Island
http://www.anaphoria.com